---
title: Haskell 2016: impressions of a first timer
tag: Haskell
---

I had an exhausting yet exciting trip to Nara where for the first time
I am interacting with the functional programming community. What
started out as a hobby is taking its toll on me; I am getting sucked
in deeper and deeper into functional programming and it seems I am not
minding that.

The broad area of functional programming and type theory is seeing a
revolution of some sort. For a functional programmer it seems nothing
is "esoteric" as long as it helps in solving the nut and bolt problems
encountered in designing reliable software. It would not surprise me
if the next big idea after sliced bread and monads rise from the murky
depths of [hott] and become suddenly mainstream. A large contingent of
participants were from the Industry, not the usual suspects like
Microsoft Research, but from startups, banks, trading companies
(Wolves of wallstreet?). That is extremely satisfying to a researcher
in this area.

For me, this conference is also special in the sense that for the
first time, I collaborated with some one ([Brent Yorgey]) whom I have
never met face to face before. I am amazed at the intensity with which
we worked with git as the medium of communication. This was more like
the collaboration in the free software world than the typical
academics collaboration that I am more used to. I wish academics moves
more to this kind of a model.

This is also my second visit to Japan and I should say I am just as
impressed now as I was in 2003. For a fan of fast trains like me,
Japan is the ultimate destination of course.  But Japan is not just
tech. Its culture, food and the subtle aesthetics are all
impressive. No wonder this land produced geniuses like
[wikipedia:Akira Kurosawa]() or [wikipedia:Hayao Miyazaki]().


[hott]: <http://www.homotopytypetheory.org/> "Homotopy type theory"
[brent yorgey]: <http://ozark.hendrix.edu/~yorgey/> "Brent Yorgey"
